Now that we've talked a bit
about streams and the three
phases, let's spend
a little time giving
an overview of some of
the common operations that
can occur in a stream.
We're going to talk about
some common operations that
are used to create a stream as
part of the splitting phase.
And we'll also talk about
some of the common aggregate
operations in the stream, which
involve the various supplying
and combining phases.
Let's first start by giving a
quick overview of operations
that can create a stream.
The operations that create
streams, surprisingly enough,
or not surprisingly enough,
are known as factory methods.
And factory methods, of
course, create things.
In this case,
factory methods can
be used to create a
stream from some source.
So for example, here,
we see the of method
being used to create a
stream from an array.
The of factory
method essentially
converts an array of
elements of type T--
in this case, string--
into a stream of
elements of type T--
again, in this case, string.
There are many,
many factory methods
available in the
streams framework that
can be used to create streams.
These are some of the key
factory methods we'll focus on
in this course, which
will be the stream factory
method, the parallel
stream factory method,
the split as stream factory
method, the of factory method,
and finally the stream support
dot stream factory method,
which takes a spliterator
and goes ahead
and will create either a
parallel or sequential stream.
There's an upcoming
lesson, which
we'll talk about these factory
methods in more detail shortly.
Let's now talk about Java
stream aggregate operations.
As you may recall from
our previous discussion,
an aggregate operation
performs a behavior
on each element in a stream.
The behaviors that are
going to be performed
are typically implemented by a
lambda expression or a method
reference corresponding to
some functional interface.
So if you think
about the coverage
we've had in other courses about
functional programming in Java,
then you should be familiar
with what a lambda expression is
and the method reference.
And of course, I will show lots
and lots and lots of examples
using lambda expressions
and method references
in the context of Java streams.
Here's a simple example of how
this gets applied in practice.
This is our little
case study example
from Hamlet and its characters.
And you can see here that the
map intermediate operation
takes the capitalized
method reference and uses
that to take the stream and
consistently capitalize it,
thereby producing an
output stream that
is capitalized consistently.
All that means is that we
uppercase the first letter
and lowercase all
the other letters.
And I'll show you the code
for this in just a bit.
Aggregate operations
in a stream can
be composed together to form a
pipeline of processing phases.
And you can see here, there's
lots of examples of pipelines.
We'll talk about some
other examples of pipelines
a little bit later this week.
But you can think of
things as basically flowing
from one source into a series
of transformers or filters
that modify the
stream in some way.
The output of one
aggregate operation
can be input into the
next one in the stream.
So that's why it's a pipeline.
So if you take a look
at the example here,
we have some stream
source that gets
put into the first
aggregate operation.
And it's behavior f.
And that will output,
essentially, f of x.
That then gets fed into the
next aggregate operation
in the stream which applies some
behavior g to every element.
So we get the output there,
which is g of f of x.
And then finally,
we have that fed
into yet another
aggregate operation, which
could be a terminal operation.
So it actually won't
have an output stream.
But it may have
some other behavior,
which we'll talk about later.
As you can see here, the
way this works in practice
is you typically end
up chaining together
the aggregate operations
via something known
as the fluent interface model.
If you look at the link at
the bottom of the slide,
you'll learn more
about fluid interfaces.
But essentially,
what happens is you
take the output of one phase.
And then you simply
pipe it or connect it
to the next phase or
the next operation.
So you can see here,
we do stream dot of.
And that feeds into
the dot filter.
And that feeds into the dot map.
And that feeds into
the dot sorted.
the dot for each.
So that the dots, here,
are just ways of indicating
this is a call to another step
in the overall stream pipeline.
In this model, you
can see the factory
method creates the stream
from the array of inputs.
This aggregate operation
returns a stream
that only contains
elements that match
the predicate-- in other
words, only have letters
that start with
uppercase or lowercase h.
We then go ahead
and map the elements
to consistently capitalize them.
We apply the capitalized method
reference, which is a function,
to the elements of the stream.
Then we sort everything.
And then finally, we
have a terminal operation
that prints out the results.
And for each of these
different stages,
we have lessons that will talk
about the mechanisms involved
with each of the
stages and the phases
in much more detail
coming up shortly.
Java Streams iterate internally,
and from the programmer's point
of view, invisibly, between the
various aggregate operations
that form the pipeline.
And there's various
reasons for doing this.
This link at the
bottom of the slide
has some good
discussions that compare
and contrast internal iterators,
which is what streams do,
with external iterators.
I'll come back and
talk about this more
in just a few minutes.
But the basic point
there is that you
don't have to be responsible
for iterations with the Java
streams model.
One of the nice
things about this
is it provides lots
of opportunities
for transparent optimizations
by the stream framework.
Streams can omit certain of
these intermediate operations
if they realize they
aren't necessary.
The streams framework
can also transparently
paralyze these various stages.
And it just shields
you from all kinds
of accidental
complexities that arise
were you to try to program
with external iterators.
And I'll go through that in
more detail in just a bit.
Here's an example of
what the code would
look like were we
to try to program
this using external iterations.
So as you can see in
this particular model,
we would end up getting
a list of strings
which can correspond to the
names of the Hamlet characters.
We would then have a loop
that went from the index I
to the list size.
And then for each
step along the way,
we would go ahead
and essentially
check to see whether
or not things were
starting with the letter h.
If they were starting
with the letter h,
we would go ahead and set
them and capitalize them
consistently in the list.
Otherwise, we would
remove it from the list.
When we're done with that,
we would sort the collection
and finally go ahead and
print it out using a for loop.
This type of approach,
as you can see,
has a number of tricky elements.
It's got more
accidental complexities.
You can get the loop
index counters incorrect.
You might forget to do
something in the way in which
the if-else statement works.
It's also going
to be a lot harder
to optimize to run in parallel.
And the code is just
simply more complicated
to read because you can't
read it in a linear fashion,
whereas if you
look back here, you
can read this code
from top to bottom
without having to think
about conditional statements
and iteration and so on.
It's all handled magically
through the internal iterators
that are provided as part
of the streams framework.
We'll come back and talk
about this a little bit later
in the lesson on external
and internal iterators
that we'll cover
before the week is out.